The Joe Rogan experience. It's,
it's interesting to me that that's the thing that we look forward to the most,
to the average person, if they thinks about, they think about space,
they think about intelligent life that is far more interesting to them than the
fact that there's black holes out there that are powering planets.
They're sucking stars into its event,
horizon this infinite point of density that we can't even really begin to
imagine with our own little.
Yeah. Yeah. And, uh,
and the fact that all of this arose without a guiding intelligence, you know,
that there are black holes and there are active galactic nuclei,
and there are black holes slamming into each other creating gravitational waves
that we can actually detect. I mean,
it is a wonderfully rich reality that we are fortunate to be
part.
Of. Do you experience much pushback or a much, uh,
conflict from religious people who don't like the fact that you describe things
in that way that they didn't need an intelligent force or intelligent creator
to, that's.
An interesting question because, um, the biological community,
people like Richard Dawkins and the like,
I think have really borne the brunt of the religious pushback
because they're dealing directly with the phenomena of life.
And that's the precious commodity that somehow we want to be sacred and
therefore our religious sensibility will push back on it,
just being the mindless laws of physics and evolution yielding, you know,
life on planet earth.
They haven't pushed as hard on the quantum physicists and the cosmologists
as they have on the biologist. But I have had conversations. Many of them are,
are, are, are respectful as opposed to antagonistic where the view
is that I am wrong, headed that I am missing the point.
And some of these religious folks are fantastically accomplished
scientists. That's weird. Yeah. I mean, I went to a gathering,
I think it can talk about now it was closed door gathering.
You weren't meant to describe you don't get two or three of them really opened
myself up. And, um, and uh, I thought it was, it was signed.
It was called science and the spiritual quest.
And it was a bunch of scientists that were being brought together.
And I thought it was going to be an interesting,
but ultimately one note meeting,
I thought everybody's going to basically say the same thing.
There could be a God, there's no evidence for a God.
We've got the laws of physics and we're going to just press forward under the
assumption that physics is all there is until the clouds part and God reveals
him or herself or itself to us. And at that point we may change our tune.
It was not one note.
I was the only person who had that perspective in the room.
Everybody else was coming out religion from a very different way of
thinking about the world. In fact,
there's one Nobel Laureate in the room who got up and sang Psalms as
part of his presentation. And I was sitting there and I was like,
what is happening here? This is so unexpected to me.
And what it really meant was I was so closed-minded into the varieties of
religious engagement that happened in the world and it opened my eyes.
And this one Nobel Laureate in particular, I did say to him at the end, I said,
when you look at me and you hear my view, what do you think?
And he kind of put his arm around me in an avuncular way and said, you know,
you're, you're a real smart guy and you don't understand the true
reality. And, um,
I think ultimately you will cause you're open-minded and you're on a journey.
And I hope that your journey will finally take you to the place where I have
been for for many years,
that was so unexpected that this Nobel Laureate who I respected for his,
his concrete mathematical and experimental work saw the world
completely.
Differently. Now what's the spectrum of belief. Yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely. But I was the one who was far.
Out, I was the one who was untethered. Yeah.
I mean, I came in there. I was like, whoa. You know, and, and, and, and, and,
and clearly they arranged the meeting to have a spectrum of perspectives.
I mean,
this is not something that was randomly designed and it just so happened. Uh,
but it was an eye-opener. And I, and from that, I rent to read, do you know,
William James, his book, uh, varieties of religious experience.
So it's a book that William James great psychologist wrote in 1902.
And it was based on a series of lectures. I think he gave in Scotland. Um,
and it is the most heartfelt and rational approach
to religion and science that I think has ever been written. And yet,
most people don't know much about it because what he does is he goes
through and he documents through his own research and through reading
biographies and interviewing individuals,
the vastly different ways that people think about religion and why they
think about religion and the value that religion has in their lives. And, and,
and when you read that book, it doesn't convert me.
I haven't changed my views on whether or not there is a God,
but it has changed my views on the value of a religious sensibility,
the role that it plays in people's lives. Now, look, it can be, you know,
you talk to people like Sam Harris and, and, and, you know, it's,
it's a destructive force in the world,
and it has been a destructive force in some ways, but that's not the full story.
The full story is that for some individuals,
it gives a connection to a historical lineage.
That's deeply valued for some individuals.
It puts their life in a larger setting that allows them to be in the world in a
more productive way.
So there are a whole range of roles that religious engagement can play.
The problem is when you start to pit it against scientific insight,
then you run into trouble,
but religion was never developed to give us factual information about the world.
Religion will never give us the electron magnetic moment to nine decimal
places. That's the purview of scientific investigation.
And if you can keep these straight in your mind,
there's a definite and powerful role for a religious sensibility
in the world. Yeah.
I've, I feel like it gives people in a lot of ways of scaffolding for ethics and
morality and allows them some alleviation of anxiety. Exactly.
A feeling of purpose is, but like you said,
as long as it's not conflicting with rigid scientific reality,
like scientific provable scientific reality.
Yeah. And I got to tell you, it's a funny thing, you know, Richard Dawkins,
I don't know. Have you had him on the program? Yeah, so, so,
so you know that his, um,
his Mo in the world is very anti-religious.
I think he would agree with me on that.
I don't want to put words into his mouth. Um, but, um,
I did a event with him in New York. Uh, the beacon theater, I don't know,
maybe a year ago or something like that.
And it was very interesting because in a one-on-one conversation,
his views were very similar to mine. I tell him, look,
we don't agree with in totality, but I was saying to him,
there are times I go around the world and I will do things that are utterly
irrational. I'll knock on wood for good luck.
I'll speak to my dead father. I know that he's not really there.
I'll pray to God on occasion. If I think that I could use that backup,
not because I think there's some bearded individual in the sky.
It's just a behavioral tendency that I find to be
comforting and useful. And I said this to Richard and he said, I totally get it.
I was like, what? He was like, I totally get it. He said, he said, in fact,
he said,
I don't like to sleep in a house that has a reputation as being haunted.
You know, you know, and, and.
For me, it was such a beautiful human moment.
It was such a beautiful human moment where we were just like being human beings.
And then they said, we're both centers. And I agree,
we are both centers in that sense, because we know how the world works.
We know this doesn't make any sense. And yes, it's still part of somehow, uh,
how we behave in the world.
And I think there's a value to recognizing that that is what it means to be
human.
You will engage in the world in ways that are not necessarily strictly adhering
to some rational perspective of how the scientific world operates.
I would love to see Richard Dawkins outside of a hundred. Yeah.
Exactly, exactly. You know?
Uh, yeah. So, so, you know, um.
It's all just to say, yeah,
that I kind of feel like there are many pathways toward insight in
the world. There are many ways to live a life.
There are many ways to come to terms with our own impermanence,
and it's not as though something is right or something is wrong.
It's a question of, is it useful to you?
And I think that we have to be very open-minded in the kinds of
behaviors that, um, uh,
that we allow to happen in the world, you know, um, you know,
even romp that it's nutty stuff.
But if some of those individuals who go there find that it allows them to
live in the world in a more productive way,
alleviating anxiety feeling like they're on a spiritual quest.
So be it. Yeah. That's the thing that.
Sucks. I mean, it's hard for people to understand if you're not in that space,
that head space that are, you don't need this structure,
but for some people even Scientology or something along those lines,
it seems loopy on paper can provide them with legitimate structure
and benefit their lives in a tangible way that they could describe to you. Yeah,
exactly.
And my feeling is that, um, if there was an, I don't know that to be the case,
and maybe some biologists will push back on this, but if there was a, a race of,
for want of a better word, you know,
Vulcan like individuals who approach the world in a completely rational
manner, evaluating the data, figuring out the most sensible course of action,
competing against a crazy group of individuals like us,
who will come up with wild, fictional ideas gods in the heavens,
you know, demons haunting the world.
I think it's the latter group that ultimately would triumph because with
that kind of freedom of thought, you get novelty,
you get ingenuity, you get creativity.
And so I feel as though this is part and parcel of who we are and why we have
survived and to sort of come at the world with, uh,
a scientific club that's meant to smash away anything that
disagrees with the scientific worldview is an unfortunate way of,
of looking at the world.
Yeah.
There's something about creativity that it doesn't necessarily have to abide by
any laws of logic and it could still be beneficial. Yeah.
And, and, and, and that's why, yeah, stunning,
when somebody comes up with something it's like, where did that come from?
It didn't come from a rational approach to working out, you know,
Brahms third symphony.
It emerged from the churning emotions of an individual who
happens to be made up of trillions of particles guided by physical law,
responding to the environment,
which is impinging his senses with an incredible array of influences.
And through that world emerges this spectacular piece of
music. Mm that's. Breathtaking. Yeah. Utterly breathtaking.
Yeah. And it's amazing what that music can inspire as it reaches out to,
you know, X amount of people and then causes different thoughts in their mind.
And then that causes in turn another branch of creativity, another,
another new line of thinking that they might've ever never pursued.
Yeah.
And that, to me,
establishes that the notion that language is the only
way we can know about the world know Vichtenstein had this perspective,
that the limits of my language limits of my world,
that seems to me utterly wrong. I mean,
the experience of music or the experience of
cogitating about the world, but not trying to overlay a narrative upon it,
just feeling your way in to reality reveals things
about the world that I think are, are beyond linguist. You can.
Talk religion with a really intelligent person who's objective,
who has a belief. It's,
it's such an interesting subject because it's,
it requires suspension of disbelief in order to
absorb some of the stories.
But there's clearly a history behind this of thousands of
years of translations and trying to get to the,
what did they mean when they wrote this down and how much did they know and what
were they trying to do?
Were they just trying to get everybody to calm down and stay in, right? Or were.
They trying to find some means of gluing the group together by a
shared beliefs or, you know,
they're folks who basically say that there are qualities of the human brain that
naturally leave it open to a religious sensibility? I mean, for instance,
we have agency detection systems in our brain where we look around the world and
we tend to assign agency to things that happen that's useful. Right. Because,
you know, if you mistake a windblown branch for a Jaguar, yeah, it's fine.
You thought it was Jaguar, but as just a branch. But if the reverse happens,
you think it was a Jaguar and you think it's wind blown, Brent,
you're going to get eaten. So we tend to over and out agency into the world.
There is evolutionary value to that. So when the wind blows,
we tend to think there's a mind up there when the river gurgles,
we tend to think that there's a mind in there.
And this is sort of the seed for the kinds of perspectives that you'll find in
many of the world's religions. So there's,
there's natural course of events that can lead to, uh,
the arising of the institution,
or at least the ideas behind the institution of religion and for
students that have never encountered that idea before it can really shake
things up. And I think in a, in a very valuable way, you know, so, uh,
so I think you're absolutely right.
Having a conversation with somebody who has a religious perspective is
deeply interesting to understand where that mind came
to the place that it got to. And from a personal sensibility, I give you,
you know, I just give you one little anecdote. You know, my dad died.
I was 23 years old and, uh,
unexpectedly I'd been visiting home.
I was at Harvard at the time I was visiting from Cambridge and we had a nice
weekend. And by the time I got back to Cambridge on the bus, my mom called me,
said, dad's dead. It was so, so shocking. It was like,
so sudden it was so complete.
And I remember I went back home and my dad was not a religious man,
but we knew that he would want to have a ceremony. And we,
and we did it. And we had, you know,
a minion of Jews coming to the house to recite the, the cottage prayer.
Cause we weren't religious. We didn't know what we were doing, you know,
and I had no idea what these men were saying,
but it was deeply comforting. In fact,
I didn't want to know what they were saying to me.
It was just a collection of ancient sounds,
but this sounds connected me across the generations to a
culture that had been extended back 5,000 years and in a moment of crisis,
that was a very comforting and useful connection to have.
Yeah.
That, that,
that is where I find people get the most out of religion in,
in the fact that it brings communities together in this
sort of cohesive ritual, where everybody acts together and everybody,
you feel like there's completion to it. Like you're putting someone,
you know,
putting someone into perspective and you're doing so with this religious
ceremony and.
And when large groups of people get together and engage in a
ritual behavior, something magical happens. You know,
I've spoken to evolutionary psychologists like Steve Pinker. Who's a,
is a wonderful thinker in here too. Yeah. Okay. And, and, you know,
Steve is skeptical that this kind of ritual
behavior can yield the kind of cohesive bonding that some
people suggest that it does, but you know, you probably have the,
I have the on occasion engaged in these ritual behaviors, you know,
mass drumming and movement, you know, and, and I got to tell you,
you are quickly,
I find transported to a place where you are now part of a collective
and you feel yourself melting into the group and you are one.
And if you've never had that experience,
I think is something that you should have,
because I think it's a vital part of our heritage.
It is part of how we got to be who we are.
Yeah. There's something about group acceptance and a group of people
acting and doing something together that does create this very strange bond.
It doesn't necessarily exist amongst individuals. It's, it's a weird bond.
Is a very weird bond because it has nothing to do with the individuals,
nothing to do with the personality of Jim or merits.
It's irrelevant at that point.
It's somehow joining you together into this massive humanity.
That's all engaged in the same practice.
And somehow you feel as though your identity melts into the larger whole,
I don't know why it happens negative aspects to that sort of thing or that mob
mentality.
Of course,
I give you ever been in a situation where things got chaotic and you really had
this feeling like anything can happen.
I've seen it happen. I've never been part of it, but weird,
but I have a sort of feeling in the air. Yeah. I have an analogous.
One, which is, you know, my brother is a Hari Krishna. Whoa. You know,
and so, you know, he is 13 years older than me and, and left, uh,
college in the sixties, which was a tumultuous time and,
and went to Europe and ultimately joined into what many people think
of as some kind of cultish activity. And so, uh, but,
but he's not a cult thinker, he's an original thinker, he's a brilliant thinker.
And yet within this group mentality,
you can imagine a certain kind of group think can take over these people,
imagine that this happens. So yes,
it has positive aspects and it can have negative aspects. Uh, but in the end,
I think there is a long lineage in which those of our
forebears who survive were the ones who could join together into these more
potent, these more powerful groups.
And that way we're able to triumph over other groups, you know,
in the ancestral environment, you know,
there there's different readings of the archeological record,
whether it was a dangerous place in the hunter gatherer past or a sort of Placid
place. But one reading says it was a very dangerous place.
And therefore those groups that survived were the ones who were able to
establish this kind of allegiance to the whole.
And certainly I think this kind of ritual behavior may have been part of that.
Bond together through shared experiences. Yeah.
And, and belief. Yeah.
And if you're all believing in the same supernatural entity,
that's a powerful in principle, powerful glue.
Do, do you find that there's, uh, I mean,
I don't want to say an arrogance in some academics that maybe it's not the right
word,
but this being too quick to dismiss any positive
benefit at all about religion. Yes.
Um, it's the knee-jerk reaction among a certain group of
academics and, um,
it feels deeply unfortunate to me,
it almost feels like a religion of its own sort when it's just the
response, as opposed to a careful, thoughtful,
heartfelt analysis of the situation.
I frankly wish that more people would read William James, his book,
because I do think that it's the kind of, because here's a psycho, a scientist,
right. Of deeply thoughtful scientist,
who knows how to analyze data,
knows how to rationally engage with the world who was plumbing,
the depths of religion in a very, very meaningful,
insensitive way. You know? And by the end of these lectures though,
I think was lecture number 20 or something. He describes religion as this, um,
as, as something that helps the journey toward the,
the terror and the beauty of phenomenon, he describes it as the,
the voice of the thunder, the gentleness of the summer rain.
He described it in terms of the sublimating of the stars and this kind of
transcendent approach to the religious experience,
I think brings it out of the academic guys that is
often thrown upon it, which is something that is contravening.
Everything we know about the world it's causing to think in
ways that are irrational. I mean, this whole trope that you hear,
it's not that there isn't some truth to that, but it's an incomplete truth.
And if you're willing to approach religion in a way where you discard the pieces
that offend you, throw away the parts that you think are utter nonsense,
only keep those aspects that are useful to you in your
life. Then there is a place for it.
I think therein lies the problem with a lot of people they're not willing to do
that. This need for suspension of disbelief,
troubles them so much that they feel like fools. If they buy into something.
And we're also dealing with all religions,
except the ones that are super questionable,
like Scientology or Mormonism that are very old.
And the idea of maybe it would be better if we came
up with something that we could all agree on in 2020,
maybe it would be wonderful if we have something that,
that maybe has science in it,
maybe something that has a genuine understanding of how human beings react and
what the benefits of community and having these in environments
where loving,
conscious people communicate with each other in a very positive way that this
could be a new form of this thing that we seem to desire so greatly.
Yeah. And I agree,
and I have just had to make this point in the book because the point that I make
there is that to truly engage with the world,
you have to use a variety of stories. We're fundamentally storytellers.
That's what human beings are. Now.
There's the reductionist story that physicists are well-equipped to talk about
with particles and laws of physics. On top of that,
you've got the chemist story, the complex molecules,
you've got the biologist story that begins to talk about cells in life.
You got the psychological story,
the neurophysiological story that brings a minding consciousness.
And within that,
you then have all of the activities that conscious beings undertake,
which includes religion and includes telling other kinds of stories and includes
creative expression. You need them all.
And to sort of say that the scientific account is the only account by which
you're ever going to gain. True qualities of the world is a very, in my view,
limited description of what truth is.
There is objective truth in the world that we can measure that we can describe
to the equations of self-worth,
but there's also internal true spiritual truth that you get to by
self-examination,
it's real in the sense that you're understanding how you respond to the world.
And that is something which is deeply personal, but utterly real.
And whether it's through psychedelics, whether it's through Iowasca,
whether through a spiritual journey, whether it's through religion, regardless,
all of this adds color to the story of what it means to be a human being.